chapter_0.md, before:

# Introduction

Archaeogenetics is a research field at the interface of the natural sciences (mainly genetics) and humanities (mainly archaeology). As such, it not only inherits the ethical aspects connected to each field, but through their combination also generates new questions, such as: How do we balance the need to preserve archaeological material as cultural heritage and the need to destructively sample such material in order to study it? How do we navigate between different stakeholders and interests when our data infringes on group identities? How do we interpret and communicate models of “genetic ancestry” without contributing to unscientific myths of national origins or race theories? 

We present such and similar questions in archaeogenetic research on this page, as discussed within the Ethics Interest group of the Department of Archaeogenetics at the Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History in Jena (MPI-SHH), Germany. This group was formed by junior and senior scientists in the department in response to internal and external demands to engage with the ethical matters of our research, and to continuously educate ourselves on these topics also in the light of current events. While projects and opinions within our group are diverse, we all felt the need to increase  our understanding of ethical questions and discuss how to conduct our research responsibly. This discussion started out in December 2018 and received further input and comments from all members of the Department of Archaeogenetics and invited guests. 

We acknowledge that we contribute to the mentioned issues in our field. With that in mind we believe that it is important that we participate in this discussion from inside the field, providing a different perspective on the subject compared to external institutions such as government bodies, ethical review boards, grant agencies, or science journalists. We understand this text not as a comprehensive lecture but as a reflective piece and a conversation starter to discuss how we can do better moving forward.

This is a living text. As a consequence, it will be further updated through future releases. Changes will be indicated in a Changelog at the top of this document. We have structured this document along key topics that we have identified, which can be read and discussed independently, or as a whole. Each section contains a general introduction and discussion of the key problems, as we have experienced them, and also tries to give recommendations on appropriate approaches to dealing with them and aspirations we have for the field (“Best practices”). These recommendations are highly subjective and represent our opinions only.

This document thus serves three purposes:
- Serve as a living discussion record within our department and as a basis for discussion also beyond our department.
- Serve as an educational resource for new students or junior researchers entering the field, here or elsewhere.
- Communicate to our scientific partners, and to the general public, some of the issues we face and the actions we recommend.

While its first release marks a time point where we are comfortable to share the current status of our discussion, the discussions continue, and the publication is an invitation to join us in the discussion and challenge our views and ideas.

Commit message:

- added scaffold chapters - updated text in Intro and Chapter 1 - added some hyperlinks and citations

chapter_0.md, after:

# Introduction

Archaeogenetics is the analysis of genetic material preserved in archaeological remains using molecular approaches, such as genome-wide DNA sequencing. It addresses questions about the genetic relationships, geographical origins, natural selective processes or the genetic structure of past and present-day human, plant, animal or even microbial populations. Terms used widely synonymous with archaeogenetics are paleogenomics and ancient genomics.

Archaeogenetics is a research field at the interface of the natural sciences (mainly genetics) and humanities (mainly archaeology). As such, it not only inherits the ethical aspects connected to each field, but through their combination also generates new questions, such as: How do we balance the need to preserve archaeological material as cultural heritage and the need to destructively sample such material in order to study it? How do we navigate between different stakeholders and interests when our interpretations of the data infringe on group identities? How do we interpret and communicate models of “genetic ancestry” without contributing to unscientific myths of national origins or race theories? 

We present such and similar questions in archaeogenetic research on this page, as discussed within the Ethics Interest group of the Department of Archaeogenetics at the Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History in Jena (MPI-SHH), Germany. This group was formed by junior and senior scientists in the department in response to internal and external demands to engage with the ethical matters of our research, and to continuously educate ourselves on these topics. While projects and opinions within our group are diverse, we all felt the need to increase  our understanding of ethical questions and discuss how to conduct our research responsibly. This discussion started out in December 2018 and received input and comments from all members of the Department of Archaeogenetics.

As scientists, we are not neutral with respect to ethical questions around our research. We have a clear interest to advance knowledge and study human remains where possible. We thereby may also  contribute to some issues that we identify and discuss in this document. With that in mind we believe that our point of view from inside the field of research can add to other perspectives from external institutions such as government bodies, ethical review boards, grant agencies, or science journalists. We hope that our unique perspective can contribute to ongoing discussions inside and outside the field.

This is a living text. As a consequence, it will be further updated through future releases. Changes will be indicated in a [Changelog](CHANGELOG.md). We have structured this document along key topics that we have identified, which can be read and discussed independently, or as a whole. Each section contains a general introduction and discussion of the key problems, as we have experienced them, and also tries to give recommendations on appropriate approaches to dealing with them and aspirations we have for the field (“Best practices”).

This document thus serves three purposes:
- Serve as a living discussion record within our department and as a basis for discussion also beyond our department.
- Serve as an educational resource for new students or junior researchers entering the field, here or elsewhere.
- Communicate to our scientific partners, and to the general public, some of the issues we face and the actions we recommend.
